MAGE-TAB Version	1.1			
Public Release Date	2017-07-07			
Investigation Title	RNA-seq of 134 patients undergoing bowel resection for inflammatory bowel disease and controls			
Comment[Submitted Name]	A functional genomics predictive network model identifies regulators of inflammatory bowel disease: Mount Sinai Hospital (MSH) Population Specimen Collection and Profiling of Inflammatory Bowel Disease			
Experiment Description	This study focuses on inflammatory bowel disease gene expression profiling. Surgical specimens from 134 patients undergoing bowel resection for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and non IBD controls at Mount Sinai Medical Center were collected as the source of tissue.  Control samples (CLs) were harvested from normal non inflamed bowel located more than 10 cm away from the tumor from patients undergoing bowel resection for sporadic colon cancer. Ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn’s (CD) patient samples were all isolated from areas containing moderate to severe inflammation. The diagnostic pathology report for each specimen was provided by the Mount Sinai Hospital Pathology Department.  Patients with UC and patients with CD shared common medications including corticosteroids, infliximab, azathioprine, and mesalamine. Surgical specimens from 134 patients undergoing bowel resection for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and non IBD controls at Mount Sinai Medical Center were collected as the source of tissue. Control samples (CLs) were harvested from normal non inflamed bowel located more than 10 cm away from the tumor from patients undergoing bowel resection for sporadic colon cancer. Ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn’s (CD) patient samples were all isolated from areas containing moderate to severe inflammation. The diagnostic pathology report for each specimen was provided by the Mount Sinai Hospital Pathology Department. Patients with UC and patients with CD shared common medications including corticosteroids, infliximab, azathioprine, and mesalamine. The samples were collected fresh and the tissue was further processed for isolation. A representative 0.5 cm tissue fragment was isolated from the collected surgical specimen samples, flash frozen and stored at -80C. Tissue was homogenized in Trizol following the manufacturer's protocol (Life Technologies) and RNA extraction was performed. RIN scores >7 were used for Poly A RNA-seq.			
Protocol Name	P-GSE83687-3	P-GSE83687-1	P-GSE83687-4	P-GSE83687-2
Protocol Description	RNA was prepared using the KAPA Stranded RNA-Seq with RiboErase sample preparation kit (kapabiosystems) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 500ng of total RNA was ribo depleted, fragmented and went under first and second strand synthesis, A tailing, adapter ligation and PCR amplification (using 11 cycles). Final libraries were quantified using the KAPA Library Quantification Kit (KAPA Biosystems), Qubit Fluorometer (Life Technologies) and Agilent 2100 BioAnalyzer. Samples were sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq2500 sequencer (v4 chemistry) using 1 x 100bp cycles.	A variety of clinical perturbation by following the clinical guidelines.	Illumina Casava1.82 software used for basecalling. Short reads in fastQ format are processed using RAPiD, which is a RNA-Seq analysis framework developed and maintained by the Technology Development group at Icahn Institute for Genomics and MultiScale Biology. . RAPiD uses STAR to map the short reads to the [hg19 ] reference and resultant alignment map in BAM format is quantified for gene level expression using featureCounts of the subreads package. Detailed QC metrics are generated using the RNASeQC package Genome_build: hg19 Supplementary_files_format_and_content: tab-delimited text files include fragment per kilobase per million (FPKM) for each gene	Inflammatory bowel disease and health control samples
Protocol Type	nucleic acid library construction protocol	sample treatment protocol	normalization data transformation protocol	growth protocol
Publication Title	A functional genomics predictive network model identifies regulators of inflammatory bowel disease.			
Publication Author List	Peters LA, Perrigoue J, Mortha A, Iuga A, Song WM, Neiman EM, Llewellyn SR, Di Narzo A, Kidd BA, Telesco SE, Zhao Y, Stojmirovic A, Sendecki J, Shameer K, Miotto R, Losic B, Shah H, Lee E, Wang M, Faith JJ, Kasarskis A, Brodmerkel C, Curran M, Das A, Friedman JR, Fukui Y, Humphrey MB, Iritani BM, Sibinga N, Tarrant TK, Argmann C, Hao K, Roussos P, Zhu J, Zhang B, Dobrin R, Mayer LF, Schadt EE			
PubMed ID	28892060			
Publication DOI	10.1038/ng.3947			
Term Source Name	ArrayExpress	EFO		
Term Source File	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/efo.owl		
Experimental Factor Name	disease			
Experimental Factor Type	disease			
Person Last Name	Schadt			
Person First Name	Eric			
Person Email	eric.schadt@mssm.edu			
Person Affiliation	Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai			
Person Address	Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 1425 Madison Avenue, New York, USA			
Person Roles	submitter			
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE83687			
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-83687			
Comment[GEOReleaseDate]	2017-07-07			
Comment[ArrayExpressSubmissionDate]	2016-06-24			
Comment[GEOLastUpdateDate]	2018-02-14			
Comment[AEExperimentType]	RNA-seq of coding RNA			
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	SRP077046			
Comment[SequenceDataURI]	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/data/view/SRR3714631-SRR3714768			
SDRF File	E-GEOD-83687.sdrf.txt			
